Abstract   The robust finding that people systematically assign higher monetary values to sell a good they own than they pay to acquire it  i.e.  the endowment effect  was recently explained by the differential importance of positive and negative object properties  depending on endowment state. Whether this explanation can also be applied to objects with risky outcomes is not clear. Two studies using lottery tickets were designed to examine the effects of focusing on aspects consistent with a person s endowment state  i.e.  probability of winning and size of winnings for owners  probability of losing and price of lottery ticket for nonowners  or inconsistent with it. In line with previous research on consumer products  both studies showed an endowment effect for lottery tickets when participants focused on consistent aspects  but not when they focused on inconsistent aspects. We conclude that  although price decisions are mainly influenced by endowment state  the underlying focus on specific properties likely plays a role in the endowment effect for risky objects.      Although consumers are daily faced with financial decisions  their choices are shaped not only by their preferences  but also by the roles they assume. In market transactions  two roles are typically prominent  that of the party selling an object  i.e.  owner seller  and that of the party seeking to acquire it  i.e.  nonowner buyer . Owners  minimum selling price is often higher than nonowners  maximum offer for the same object. The resulting price disparity is termed the endowment effect  e.g.  Kahneman  Knetsch    Thaler  1990  Knetsch   Sinden  1984  Thaler  1980   suggesting that people who possess   are endowed with   an object value it more highly  Morewedge  Shu  Gilbert    Wilson  2009  Shu   Peck  2011 . Although this difference deviates from standard economic theory  the endowment effect has consistently been found with a variety of objects  for an overview  see Horowitz   McConnell  2002  Sayman    nc ler  2005  such as consumer items  e.g.  mugs or pens  Kahneman  Knetsch    Thaler  1991  and objects with risky outcomes  i.e.  lottery tickets  Bar Hillel   Neter  1996  Risen   Gilovich  2007 .    Several approaches attempt to explain this effect  including current psychological theories describing different processes related to the endowment state. Previous research has shown that the focus on specific aspects of a consumer object is related to the endowment effect  Carmon   Ariely  2000  Nayakankuppam   Mishra  2005 . For example  Nayakankuppam and Mishra  2005  found that  compared to nonowners  owners focused more on the positive aspects and less on the negative aspects of consumer objects they owned  i.e.  pen  mug . Specifically  owners reacted faster to the positive aspects of their objects than to the negative ones  whereas nonowners did not  suggesting that aspects of owned objects are accessed faster and more easily.    Similarly  query theory  Johnson  H ubl    Keinan  2007  Weber et al.  2007  explains the differential importance of aspects of the objects with different memory retrieval processes. Using a research paradigm in which participants in different endowment states listed the aspects they considered while deciding on the acceptable price of a mug  Johnson and colleagues found that the order in which the aspects were retrieved from memory determined the valuation of the object. In general  aspects that strengthened the status quo and weakened the alternative status were retrieved first. Accordingly  owners started by generating value increasing aspects of the owned object and subsequently gave them more importance. Nonowners  i.e.  buyers   on the other hand  tended to generate value decreasing aspects of the object first  which resulted in their assigning a lower price to the object than owners did.    Confirmatory evidence for differential processes was found by research examining the relationship between the importance of different aspects of the objects and endowment state. For example  previous research demonstrated that people with different endowment states focused on different properties of the object they were about to trade or give up  Carmon   Ariely  2000 . Specifically  owners  price decisions were strongly associated with favorable aspects of the object to be traded  whereas nonowners  price decisions were influenced by aspects related to the money to be used to acquire the object  e.g.  attitude toward money . This research supports the hypothesis that  for consumer objects with sure outcomes  the focus of attention depends on the endowment state. However  it is unclear whether the price decisions are influenced only by the positive aspects of what is to be relinquished  that is  money or a consumer item  Carmon   Ariely  2000 . Query theory posits it is also possible that owners and nonowners focus differentially on negative aspects. Furthermore  such differences in attention focus may not be limited to consumer objects  but may also apply to risky prospects  e.g.  lotteries .    In the case of risky objects  the probability of winning and losing  and the amounts that can be won and lost  are the primary aspects of the object weighing differently in the pricing decision. In line with the mechanisms proposed by query theory  we assume that people with different endowment states attend to these aspects differently during the valuation process. Accordingly  the owners are expected to focus more on positive aspects  such as the probability of winning and the size of the potential winnings   whereas nonowners are expected to focus more on negative aspects  i.e.  the probability of losing and the potential amount to be lost . Peters  Slovic  and Gregory  2003  found support for a differential focus in the case of lottery tickets by demonstrating that owners  price decisions were more susceptible to changes in the size of winnings  while nonowners  prices relied more on information pertaining to losses.    Although previous research has indicated the importance of different aspects for the price decisions  some questions remain open. The experiments are either aimed at demonstrating a correlation between aspects of the object and price decisions  precluding causal conclusions  e.g.  Cameron   Ariely  2000  Peters et al.  2003   or they employ methods that interrupt the decision process with an additional task  e.g.  to facilitate memory retrieval  Johnson et al.  2007 . Paradigms in which participants are asked to generate or recall aspects of the object to be traded make these aspects more explicit and interfere with natural valuation processes. Some evidence exists that intuitive valuations may also depend on subconscious processes  e.g.  Evans  2008 . Thus  asking participants to think more deliberately about their decisions and to analyze their reasons can interrupt the decision process and alter their subsequent choices  Wilson   Schooler  1991 .    Accordingly  a more rigorous test of whether the differential focus mediates the effect of ownership on the price decisions would require at least two modifications. First  one would need to manipulate the important aspects without interrupting the normal decision process with an additional task. Second  instead of just showing the relationship between the price decisions and the aspects that are in line with the endowment state  i.e.  positive aspects for owners  negative aspects for nonowners   one would have to manipulate the participants  focus on the consistent and inconsistent aspects. The present experiments were conducted to eliminate these methodological concerns and to elucidate the effect of focus on specific aspects on the endowment effect for objects with risky outcomes  i.e.  lottery tickets .    Back to Top   Overview of Studies   We designed two studies to investigate  in real market transactions  the impact of focusing on the positive and negative aspects of risky lottery tickets which are consistent and inconsistent with a person s endowment state. For owners  the positive information about the lottery ticket is consistent with their endowment state  whereas for nonowners the negative information is consistent. According to query theory  directing a person s attention to consistent information should result in the typical endowment effect. However  presenting information that is inconsistent with endowment state  i.e.  negative information to owners  positive information to nonowners  should reduce the price disparity  focus hypothesis . In Study 1  we used a focus manipulation to highlight specific aspects of the lottery ticket by first displaying both positive and negative information about the lottery and then highlighting either positive or negative aspects. In Study 2  we aimed at replicating the results of Study 1 by using a slightly different probability distribution and subsequently different expected value of the lottery.    Back to Top   Study 1   Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Participants   A total of 125 participants 1  61  women  Mage   23.3 years  SDage   4.5 years  took part in this study  which lasted approximately 25 minutes and was included in a 1 h experimental battery with unrelated study materials. Participants were recruited from the University of Erfurt  using the online recruitment system of Greiner  2004  and were compensated with EUR 4. In addition  they received between EUR 0 and EUR 10 contingent on their responses and the lottery outcome.    Back to Top   Design   In a 4   2 between subjects design  focus and endowment state were varied so that half of the participants were endowed with a lottery ticket  owners sellers   whereas the other half was not  nonowners choosers . Because all transactions were real and the potential effects of participants  wealth were to be avoided  we used choosers instead of buyers in the nonowners condition  for details of the manipulation  see procedure  similar to the manipulation of Johnson et al.  2007  and Lerner  Small  and Loewenstein  2004 . In all conditions  the complete amount of information about the lottery  i.e.  probability of losing and winning and amounts  was presented before the endowment and focus manipulation. After receiving the information about the lottery  participants were randomly assigned the role of owner  seller  or nonowner  chooser  of a lottery ticket. In addition  their focus of attention was manipulated  two levels with partial information  consistent and inconsistent  and two control conditions  complete information and no information . The two experimental conditions with partial information involved repeating some of the information about the lottery ticket. In the consistent focus condition  the owners were reminded of the probability of winning  25   and the value  EUR 10  of a winning lottery ticket  while the nonowners were reminded of the negative aspects  75  probability of winning EUR 0 . Conversely  in the inconsistent focus condition  owners were reminded of the negative aspects  75  probability of winning EUR 0   and nonowners were reminded of the positive aspects  25  probability of winning EUR 10 . In the control conditions  either all of the information  complete focus condition  or no information at all  no focus condition  was repeated.    Back to Top   Materials and Procedure   At the beginning of the experiment  participants were seated in separate cubicles  in groups of up to 12  and randomly assigned to one of the eight conditions. Participants completed the questionnaire at their own speed. First  they received the complete amount of information about the lottery  which included the fact that 25  of the tickets were  positive  lottery tickets with which EUR 10 could be won and 75  were  neutral  lottery tickets with which EUR 0 could be won. The 50 visually identical lottery tickets were presented to the participants in a transparent glass urn. Endowment state was manipulated by letting owners draw an envelope containing a lottery ticket and asking them not to open it until instructed to do so. The urn full of lottery tickets was also shown to nonowners  but they did not draw a ticket. Afterwards  the participants  focus was manipulated by again presenting consistent or inconsistent  experimental conditions   or complete or no  control conditions  information about the lottery tickets. For example  owners in the consistent focus condition again were presented with positive information   Your lottery ticket has a 25  chance of winning EUR 10.  Nonowners again were presented with negative information   Your lottery ticket has a 75  chance of not winning  EUR 0 .  In the inconsistent focus condition  positive information was displayed to nonowners and negative information was presented to owners.    Then the possibility of trading the lottery ticket for money was explained to the owners  and the possibility of choosing between a lottery ticket and a sure monetary payoff was explained to nonowners  see Johnson et al.  2007 . In particular  ticket owners determined the lowest offer  from EUR 0.25 to EUR 10  they would accept to give up their lottery ticket in return for the amount of money offered  willingness to accept . Using the same range  nonowners indicated what amount of money they preferred to receive instead of a risky lottery ticket  certainty equivalent .    At the end of the experiment  to determine a participant s payoff  an amount of money was randomly drawn from a distribution of payoffs ranging from EUR 0.25 to EUR 10. If the amount drawn was higher than or equal to that stated by the given participant  the participant s payoff was the amount drawn. If the price drawn was lower than the price stated by the given participant  owners retained their lottery ticket and nonowners received a lottery ticket. Then participants were instructed to open the envelope containing the lottery ticket and see whether they had won. Finally  participants were debriefed  thanked  and paid.    Back to Top   Results   We expected to observe an endowment effect in all conditions except the inconsistent focus condition. An analysis of variance  ANOVA  with endowment state  sellers vs. chooser  and focus  no vs. complete vs. consistent vs. inconsistent  as independent variables revealed a significant interaction that supported our focus hypothesis  F 3  117    5.22  p   .002   eta p    .10  see Figure 1  . Specifically  the results showed a strong effect of endowment state in the control condition  t 33    2.33  p   .03  d   0.80  the complete focus condition  t 26    3.26  p   .01  d   1.23  and the consistent focus condition  t 30    3.37  p   .01  d   1.25. However  the effect in the inconsistent focus condition was not significant  t 28    1.10  p   .28  d   0.41. After testing for the interaction  the main effect of endowment state also reached significance  F 1  117    10.96  p   .001   eta p    .09  whereas the main effect of focus did not  F   1. These results demonstrate that price decisions are not only influenced by endowment state  but an inconsistent focus reduces the price disparity between owners and nonowners. In particular  owners  prices decreased after they were reminded of the negative aspects  inconsistent focus  M   4.32  SD   1.64  other focus conditions  M   4.98  SD   1.91  and nonowners  prices increased after they were reminded of the positive aspects  inconsistent focus  M   3.58  SD   2.02  other focus conditions  M   3.04  SD   1.75 . However  simple effects testing did not reveal that the reduced price disparity in the inconsistent focus condition occurred independently of a decrease in owners  valuations  F 1  117    2.15  p   .14   eta p    .02  or an increase in nonowners  valuations  F 1  117    1.26  p   .26   eta p    .01. Accordingly  in this study  it appears that the shift in both price decisions is necessary to significantly reduce the endowment effect.   Graphic Figure 1   Back to Top   Study 2   Study 2 was designed to replicate our findings concerning the focus hypothesis and price decisions of Study 1. To test the robustness of the observed results  we used a different probability distribution in the lottery.    Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Participants and Design   A group of 119 undergraduates 2 from the University of Bonn and the University of Erfurt  71  women  Mage   21.4  SDage   2.3  participated in Study 2. In addition to their basic compensation of EUR 3  the participants received an additional EUR 0 to EUR 10 contingent on their responses and the outcome of the lottery. We used the same between subjects design as in Study 1  where endowment state was varied between owners  i.e.  sellers  and nonowners  i.e.  choosers . Focus was manipulated on three levels  consistent vs. inconsistent vs. no focus condition  in the same way as in Study 1. In the consistent focus condition  the positive aspects  i.e.  30  probability of winning EUR 10  were presented to owners and the negative aspects  i.e.  70  probability of winning EUR 0  to nonowners. Conversely  in the inconsistent focus condition  the negative aspects were presented to owners and the positive aspects to nonowners. In the no focus condition  no information about the lottery was repeated.    Back to Top   Materials and Procedure   The materials and procedure were similar to those used in Study 1 except that in the lottery the probability of winning was now 30  and that of losing therefore 70 . Otherwise  the procedure remained the same  First  the information about the lottery was presented completely  second  ownership was manipulated  third  focus was manipulated  and finally the pricing mechanism was explained and participants made their price decisions.    Back to Top   Results   We again expected to observe the endowment effect in the consistent focus and control group conditions and a reduced endowment effect in the inconsistent focus condition. As presented in Figure 2  we found an interaction confirming the focus hypothesis  F 2  113    4.50  p   .01   eta p    .07. The results showed an endowment effect in the control group  t 39    4.00  p   .01  d   1.26  and in the consistent focus condition  t 37    2.96  p   .01  d   0.96. However  the price disparity in the inconsistent focus condition was smaller and did not reach statistical significance  t 37    1.23  p   .23  d   0.39. In the inconsistent focus condition  the owners  prices decreased  inconsistent focus  M   4.34  SD   2.21  other focus conditions  M   5.24  SD   1.88  and the nonowners  prices slightly increased  inconsistent focus  M   3.66  SD   1.10  other focus conditions  M   3.43  SD   1.31  as compared to the other conditions. However  only the owners  prices in the inconsistent focus condition differed significantly from those in all other conditions  F 1  113    4.56  p   .04   eta p    .04  nonowners  F   1  p   .62   suggesting that the reduced price disparity mainly resulted from a decrease in owners  prices. After testing for the interaction  the main effect of endowment state was found to be statistically significant  F 1  113    16.66  p   .001   eta p    .13  but that of focus manipulation was not  F   1.   Graphic Figure 2   Back to Top   General Discussion   In both studies presented  we found evidence for differential attention focus being a possible reason for the price disparity between owners and nonowners for risky objects. This suggests that owners tend to focus on the positive aspects of the owned object  whereas nonowners  attention is drawn more toward the negative aspects of the object. Highlighting the positive aspects for owners and the negative for nonowners resulted in an endowment effect of comparable magnitude to that found when attention was not manipulated. However  drawing participants  attention to the opposite  inconsistent  aspects reduced the price disparity. Shifting nonowners  attention to the positive aspects of a lottery ticket increased the price they were willing to pay  whereas shifting owners  attention to the negative aspects decreased the price they were willing to accept  Study 1 . In Study 2  we found evidence supporting the notion that especially owners  price decisions are influenced by the presentation of inconsistent information. The differential importance of aspects for owners and nonowners is in line with previous findings  Carmon   Ariely  2000  Johnson et al.  2007  Nayakankuppam   Mishra  2005   but extends those findings to objects with risky outcomes and with a focus manipulation that does not interrupt the decision process.    It seems that attention to aspects congruent with one s endowment state occurs automatically and is a function of the subsequent role one assumes. Our studies support this idea because highlighting the consistent information  all of the information  or no information through repetition did not result in different price decisions  which suggests that the consistent information is focused on. Indeed  prior research suggested that attention to information is a selective process governed by motivational aspects  e.g.  Lang  Bradley    Cuthbert  1997   and that attentional focus influences affective evaluations underlying choices  Dickert   Slovic  2009 . The roles of owners and nonowners likewise motivate attention to different pieces of available information  which then influences price decisions. This can partially be explained by people s tendency to engage in confirmatory information search to confirm their attitudes  decisions  and current situations  e.g.  Frey  1986 . By attending to information that is congruent with their current status  owners enhance the value of the object while nonowners  i.e.  buyers  enhance the value of their money. Future research should examine whether one s attention focus results in a biased representation of the entire object or different weighting of the specific aspects  e.g.  by using eye tracking  Ashby  Dickert    Gl ckner  2012 .    Our studies also extend previous research  e.g.  Peters et al.  2003  by allowing causal conclusions concerning focus and pricing decisions about risky objects  and by providing evidence that  along with memory retrieval processes  the endowment effect could also be partially explained by differential attention focus. However  our manipulation was not specifically designed to disentangle attention and memory processes. On the one hand  it is possible that the shift in focus already occurred during encoding in our studies  especially since our materials  i.e.  lottery with the given odds  did not require or facilitate memory processes in particular. But on the other hand  the representation of the lottery in memory probably influenced the construction of the price decision. Accordingly  future studies should try to disentangle these effects.    The present investigation shows that highlighting specific aspects of the object can change the price decisions in market situations with risky objects. Directing people s attention to information that is inconsistent with their endowment state can therefore influence consumer behavior and should be considered in marketing strategies to improve the valuation of a product and the subsequent willingness to buy.    Financial support for this project was given by the Max Planck Institute for Research on Collective Goods. We would like to thank Andreas Gl ckner for helpful comments  Sebastian Schier for programming support  and Maria Gladigau  Esther Kordecki  Marie Landsberg  and Selina Scholz for their help with data collection.