Self determination theory  SDT  has become an established framework for exploring motivational processes in physical exercise. The integral components of SDT are three basic psychological needs. For our study we translated and validated a German scale that measures need satisfaction in exercise. A total of 614 individuals  n   347 female  age  M   38.39 years  SD   12.05  recruited from a private fitness center  various sport clubs  and the Academic Sports Association Zurich  Switzerland  took part in the online based baseline assessment  T1 . Nine months later  216 participants completed the online follow up questionnaire  T2 . The results demonstrate adequate factor validity and internal consistency at both measurement points. Moreover  construct validity was demonstrated by medium to strong correlations of several motives to exercise and the self efficacy of physical exercise. In addition  the three subscales were differentially predictive for different types of motivation  for example  intrinsic and extrinsic  at T2  indicating good criterion validity. The newly developed German scale is a reliable and valid instrument for assessing need satisfaction in the context of physical exercise and predicting motivation over time.      Today  in most Western industrialized countries  adults have a sedentary lifestyle  Hardman   Stensel  2003   although regular exercise is considered important for attaining and maintaining physical and psychological health  Cavill  Kahlmeier    Racioppi  2006 . Self determination theory  SDT  Ryan   Deci  2004  has become an established framework for exploring motivational processes in exercise. It helps us to understand the motivational factors involved in participating in exercise  Vlachopoulos  Kaperoni    Moustaka  2011 . An important condition for research is having reliable and valid scales to assess psychological constructs within existing theories. Thus  it is crucial to provide well translated scales that also fulfill psychometric requirements such as factor composition and internal consistency. For example  Schweizer  2010  stated that  especially in Europe where a broad range of languages and cultures are present   measures have to be developed  and validated for each and every European language  p. 75 . To our knowledge  no measure of need satisfaction in exercise has been translated into German and validated  even though need satisfaction is a core construct in SDT  Ryan   Deci  2004 . Thus  this study aimed at generating a reliable and valid German measure of need satisfaction in exercise. Validity refers to the extent to which a measure assesses what it claims to measure  a distinction can be made between construct and criterion validity. Construct validity refers to whether a scale correlates with related psychological constructs  criterion validity is based on associations with several criteria  B hner  2006 .    Back to Top   Self Determination Theory   Deci and Ryan  2000  presume that motivation lies along a continuum ranging from intrinsic to extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation refers to self determined behavior  meaning that a person experiences interest in and enjoyment while performing a given activity. Extrinsic motivation is divided into four motivational styles  integrated  identified  introjected  and external regulation  which can be distinguished by their proportion of self determination. External regulation is the type of extrinsic motivation with the smallest proportion of self determination. Introjected regulation is characterized by the motivation to avoid disapproval from external sources  e.g.  friends . When people act through identified regulation  they identify with the value of the action. Finally  integrated regulation is the type of extrinsic motivation with the highest degree of self determination  Ryan   Deci  2007 . The more self determined a behavior is  the more likely someone is to persist in performing it  Ryan   Deci  2004  and the more well being is associated with it  Ryan  Deci    Grolnick  1995 . Motivation to perform a certain behavior can change from less self determined  external regulation  to more self determined  integrated regulation  by means of internalization  Ryan   Deci  2004 .    Deci and Ryan s SDT  2000  presumes three basic psychological needs  for autonomy  for competence  and for relatedness. These needs are  innate psychological nutriments that are essential for ongoing psychological growth  integrity  and well being   p. 229 . Autonomy refers to the experience of having choices and of being the initiator of one s own action  while competence refers to the ability to interact effectively with the environment  Vlachopoulos   Michailidou  2006  and is comparable to Bandura s self efficacy  1997 . Perception of relatedness is based on building relationships and on experiencing mutual respect and reliance with others  Ryan   Deci  2004 . Need satisfaction can facilitate internalization and is important for experiencing self determination and intrinsic motivation  Ryan   Deci  2004 . We therefore assess the extent to which need satisfaction predicts intrinsic motivation in order to test the criterion validity of the newly developed Psychological Need Satisfaction in Exercise Scale German  PNSEG . Furthermore  SDT presumes that need satisfaction is important for the attainment and maintenance of well being  Gagn   Ryan    Bargmann  2003   something that has been confirmed by several diary studies  e.g.  Gagn  et al.  2003  Reis  Sheldon  Gable  Roscoe    Ryan  2000 . We use indicators of well being to demonstrate the criterion validity of the newly developed PNSEG. Another motivational construct related to intrinsic motivation is flow experience  Frederick Recascino  2002 . When people experience flow  they feel fully immersed in the activity. In SDT  flow experience is associated with intrinsic motivation by means of increased awareness and enhanced feelings of well being  Frederick Recascino  2002  Kowal   Fortier  1999 . Thus  we also assess flow experience in order to examine the criterion validity of the PNSEG. Prior research in the exercise domain provided evidence for the relationship between need satisfaction  self determined motivation  and self reported exercise  e.g.  Russell   Bray  2009  Vlachopoulos   Michailidou  2006  Wilson  Rodgers    Fraser  2002 . We examine the associations between the PNSEG and exercise in order to test the criterion validity of the newly developed scale.    Back to Top   Measuring Basic Need Satisfaction in Exercise   Given the importance of domain specific instruments in the adequate assessment of psychological constructs  e.g.  Ryan  1995  Vlachopoulos   Michailidou  2006   it was necessary to design a scale for estimating the extent to which the three basic needs are satisfied in exercise. Wilson  Rogers  Rodgers  and Wild  2006  introduced the Psychological Need Satisfaction in Exercise Scale  PNSE   an 18 item measure for assessing satisfaction of the need for autonomy  competence  and relatedness in exercise. The authors conducted two studies with undergraduate students. The resulting three factor structure was consistent with the assumptions of SDT  it was well interpretable and could be confirmed in a second study  Wilson et al.  2006 . Similarly  Vlachopoulos and Michailidou  2006  developed the Basic Psychological Needs in Exercise Scale  BPNES  in Greek. Their sample comprised participants recruited from private fitness centers  aged 18 64 . They demonstrated an adequate factor structure by using confirmatory factor analysis  CFA   showing its reproducibility across two separate samples  good internal consistency  and good test retest reliability over a 4 week period. Gillet  Rosnet  and Vallerand  2008  introduced a French measure to assess need satisfaction in exercise. Their sample comprised French adolescent semiprofessional tennis players. The results showed a sufficient factor structure and good internal consistency. Based on this French version  Dom nguez  Mart n  Mart n Albo  N  ez  and Le n  2010  constructed a Spanish measure of need satisfaction in exercise  which had acceptable fit indices regarding a CFA  good Cronbach s  alpha  values  and good test retest reliability after 10 weeks. Their sample was composed of federal Spanish athletes.    Back to Top   Aim of the Present Study   As demonstrated above  need satisfaction is an important factor in the explanation of the motivational process within SDT. As there is no such German measure to date  the purpose of our study was to translate the existing English and Greek measures into German and to develop a reliable and valid scale to assess need satisfaction in the exercise domain. Our study included the following scale construction steps  translating the Greek  Vlachopoulos   Michailidou  2006  and English  Wilson et al.  2006  measures into German  selecting the items for the final version  examining the factor structure  testing the structure in two randomized split half samples in order to replicate the factor structure as well as with the same sample after 9 months  assessing internal consistency  and testing criterion and construct validity. To assess construct validity  we used self efficacy of physical exercise and several motives for engaging in exercise. To assess criterion validity  we measured the participants  motivational style for exercise  flow experience  and well being. We decided that our scale should be based on the English and Greek versions because the items and the addressed samples are applicable to leisure sport settings. In contrast  the French and Spanish versions had been tested with semiprofessional athletes. Moreover  the English and Greek scales are two independent scales  so they have the advantage of covering a broader range of aspects of need satisfaction. In contrast  the Spanish scale is an adapted version of the French scale. Finally  we assess the test retest reliability of the PNSEG over a 9 month period.    Back to Top   Method   Back to Top   Participants Sample   A total of 654 people were recruited from a private fitness center  various sport clubs  and the Academics Sports Association Zurich  Switzerland  ASVZ 1. This recruitment procedure assured the heterogeneity of the participants as well as the types of sports they engaged in. At baseline  T1   the participants filled out an online questionnaire. Thereafter  they indicated whether they were interested in participating in a second measurement point. Those interested were asked to provide their e mail address. After excluding the participants who did not answer at least one of the need satisfaction items  614 participants remained in the sample  56.5  female  1.8  did not indicate their sex . The participants ranged in age from 16 to 81 years  M   38.39  SD   12.05 . Half of the participants  52.45   had a high school degree  39.71  had received vocational training  and 458  74.59   reported being employed. The second measurement  T2  took place 9 months later  227 participants took part. After excluding those participants who did not answer at least one of the need satisfaction items at T2  216 participants remained in the retest sample. Dropout analyses revealed that there were no significant differences concerning age t 583    0.36  p   .72  sex  chi   1    0.39  p   .72  education  chi   8    9.12  p   .33  employment  chi   1    1.05  p   .31  exercise t 612     0.29  p   .77  satisfaction of the need for autonomy t 592     0.41  p   .68  satisfaction of the need for competence t 581     1.40  p   .99  and satisfaction of the need for relatedness t 580     0.02  p   .16  between the participants who took part in T1 and T2 and those who only took part in T1.    Back to Top   Development of the New Scale   The PNSEG is based on the BPNES  Vlachopoulos   Michailidou  2006  as well as on the PNSE  Wilson et al.  2006   both of which assess need satisfaction in exercise. The rationale for using both scales to develop the German measure was that we wanted to maximize the coverage of all important aspects of the target constructs. We thus used 30 items from either instrument and translated them into German using the backtranslation method  Brislin  1970 . These 30 items were then evaluated as follows  Each item was to contain one meaning  and uncommon and ambiguous expressions as well as generalizations were to be avoided  Oppenheim  1992 . In total  19 items were retained  seven for the Competence and Relatedness subscales  and five for the Autonomy subscale. Item order was randomized.    Back to Top   Measures   If not mentioned explicitly  participants provided their answers on a 7 point scale  1   I do not agree at all and 7   I agree very strongly .    Back to Top   Motives for Exercise   The Enjoyment Interest and Competence subscales of the revised Motivation for Physical Activities Measure  MPAM R  Ryan  Frederick  Lepes  Rubio    Sheldon  1997  were used to determine the degree to which participants have intrinsic motives to exercise. The Social subscale was used to determine whether participants have social motives to exercise. Motives are not a measure of intrinsic or extrinsic motivation  Frederick   Ryan  1993   but aim to assess  the satisfaction one gains from engaging in the activity   Ryan et al.  1997  p. 336 . Hence  associations between the need satisfaction in exercise items and the motives items are expected. Cronbach s  alpha  coefficients were  alpha    .73 for the subscale Competence  sample item   I exercise because I want to obtain new skills   M   4.90  SD   1.17    alpha    .80 for Enjoyment Interest  e.g.   I exercise because I enjoy this activity   M   6.21  SD   0.87   and  alpha    .92 for Social  e.g.   I exercise because I want to be with others during this activity   M   4.69  SD   0.87 .    Back to Top   Physical Exercise Self Efficacy   To assess a person s beliefs about his or her ability to engage in regular exercise despite potential barriers  e.g.   I am confident that I can exercise as intended even if I still have a lot of work to do   M   4.92  SD   0.91   the Physical Exercise Self Efficacy scale  Fuchs   Schwarzer  1994  was administered. It contains 12 items  Cronbach s  alpha  was .84.    Back to Top   Sport  and Exercise Related Self Concordance 2   Self determined motivation was assessed with the Sport  and Exercise Related Self Concordance scale  Seelig   Fuchs  2006   which includes 12 items with three items for each subscale  Intrinsic Motivation  e.g.   I exercise because it is fun   M   5.60  SD   1.00   Identified Motivation  e.g.   I exercise because it is important for me personally   M   5.25  SD   0.94   Introjected Motivation  e.g.   I exercise because I would feel bad if I did not   M   3.23  SD   1.17   and Extrinsic Motivation  e.g.   I exercise because others say I should   M   1.55  SD   0.65 . The internal consistency for the subscales was  Intrinsic Motivation   alpha    .66  Identified Motivation   alpha    .53  Introjected Motivation   alpha    .61  and Extrinsic Motivation   alpha    .51.    Back to Top   Flow   To assess participants  flow experience  we used the Flow Short Scale  Rheinberg  Vollmeyer    Engeser  2003 . The ten items measure several aspects of flow experience  e.g.   I feel just the right amount of challenge   M   5.30  SD   0.74   Cronbach s  alpha  was .87.    Back to Top   Positive Activation  Negative Activation  and Valence  PANAVA  Schallberger  2005    To determine participants  well being while they were exercising  the scale for measuring Positive Activation  PA   Negative Activation  NA   and Valence  VA  was employed. This measure is based on the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule  PANAS  Watson  Clark    Tellegen  1988  and includes an additional dimension  valence   e.g.  happy vs. unhappy . Cronbach s  alpha  for Positive Activation was  alpha    .79  four items  e.g.   How do you feel right after exercising  Happy   M   5.74  SD   0.90    alpha    .75 for Negative Activation  four items  e.g.   stressed   M   2.06  SD   0.76   and  alpha    .68 for Valence  two items  e.g.   pleased   M   6.50  SD   0.62 .    Back to Top   Physical Exercise   Vigorous physical exercise at T1 and T2 was assessed with the International Physical Activity Questionnaire  IPAQ  Booth  2000 . Participants were asked to indicate how often during the past 7 days they had engaged in vigorous physical activities such as jogging  swimming  or weight lifting. Moreover  they indicated how much time they usually spent performing those activities per exercise session. Frequency and average duration per exercise session were then multiplied in order to obtain a measure of weighted duration for the past 7 days. At T1  the participants exercised for 4.88 h per week on average  SD   4.31 . Most participants  n   248  40.39   reported doing muscle training  e.g.  weight lifting  back muscle training  or jogging  n   211  34.36  . At T2  they exercised for 5.60 h per week on average  SD   4.74 . Again  most participants  n   73  33.80   reported doing muscle training or jogging  n   70  32.41  .    Back to Top   Data Analysis   The descriptive statistics and scale values were computed with SPSS 18. CFA was conducted using Mplus 6.1  Muth n   Muth n  2010  to examine the factor structure of the PNSEG. Goodness of fit indices are reported for the CFA. The  chi   goodness of fit statistics describe the magnitude of discrepancy between the sample and the fitted covariance matrix  Hu   Bentler  1999 . Moreover  we utilized the Tucker Lewis index  TLI  and the comparative fit index  CFI   which are incremental fit indices that compare the fit of the target model with the baseline model  Geiser  2010 . Acceptable fit is indicated by values greater than .90  Hu   Bentler  1999 . The root mean square error of approximation  RMSEA  measures the approximate fit of the model to the data  and the standardized root mean square residual  SRMR  is important for evaluating the residuals. Both should be lower than .05  Geiser  2010 . The Akaike information criterion  AIC  is a descriptive measure used to compare different  nonnested  models. The model with the lowest AIC should be preferred  Geiser  2010 . Missing values were treated using full information maximum likelihood  FIML  Arbuckle  1996 .    Back to Top   Results   Back to Top   Preliminary Analysis   The first step in selecting the final items for the PNSEG was to examine the corrected item total correlations of the 19 items. Two items  both of which were Autonomy items   I feel free to exercise in my own way  and  I feel free to make my own exercise program decisions   Wilson et al.  2006   had corrected item total correlations below .30 and were therefore excluded  Field  2009 . In the second step  we identified those items that strongly defined their assigned factor as well as items that were weakly related to the factor. To this end  an initial CFA using Mplus 6.1  Muth n   Muth n  2010  was performed with the remaining 17 items. The items with the highest factor loadings and the items that together resulted in the best fitting model were retained.    An inspection of the means and standard deviations of the need satisfaction items revealed that most items had relatively high means and were negatively skewed  Table 1  . This was likely due to the high proportion of participants in our sample who regularly exercised. Although the skewness and kurtosis values exhibited a tendency toward nonnormality  the items did not depart substantially from normality  skewness   2  kurtosis   7  see West  Finch    Curran  1995 . Hence  we used maximum likelihood  ML  estimates. The corrected item total correlations were all in an acceptable range  Field  2009   the lowest being .39 and the highest .71.   Graphic Table 1   Back to Top   Descriptive Statistics and Reliability for the Three Subscales   Table 2 shows the descriptive statistics and Cronbach s  alpha  values for each of the three subscales at T1 and at T2. Cronbach s  alpha s ranged from .62  Autonomy subscale at T1  to .85  Relatedness subscale at T2 . In sum  the internal consistency can be considered satisfying. Test retest reliability was assessed 9 months after T1  It was r   .54  p   .001  for Autonomy  r   .61  p   .001  for Competence  r   .61  p   .001  for Relatedness  and r   .64  p   .001  for the total scale  11 items .   Graphic Table 2   Back to Top   Confirmatory Factor Analysis   First  we randomly divided the T1 sample into two halves and calculated two one factor models by allowing all items to load on one single factor. The fit values indicated that the one factor solutions did not represent the data well  Table 3  . After that  we calculated two CFAs with three factors  Autonomy  Competence  and Relatedness  for the two randomly divided halves of the sample. These models showed an adequate data fit  except for the TLI in Split Sample 2  Table 3   which was slightly too low  TLI   .89 . For Split Sample 1  the factor loadings ranged from .40 to .83  Figure 1  . The latent factor correlations were .84  Competence   Autonomy   .46  Autonomy   Relatedness   and .53  Competence   Relatedness . For Split Sample 2  the factor loadings ranged from .51 to .85  Figure 1 . The latent factor correlations were .82  Competence   Autonomy   .48  Autonomy   Relatedness   and .32  Competence   Relatedness .   Graphic Table 3  Graphic Figure 1  Due to the rather high latent correlations between Autonomy and Competence  we calculated a CFA for every subsample with two only latent factors  Autonomy and Competence as one single factor and Relatedness as the other  instead of three. The model fit  in terms of TLI  CFI  etc.  remained the same   or worsened  in the case of the AIC  Table 3 . Thus  the two factor solution was rejected. In the next step  we calculated a three factor CFA with the T2 data. The fit indices were in a satisfactory range  Table 3  and the latent factor correlations were .82  Competence   Autonomy   .48  Autonomy   Relatedness   and .71  Autonomy   Relatedness . The factor loadings were comparable to the T1 models.